## Changelog

### Version 2.0.0

This latest version introduces improvements to the DEA Land Cover product, enhancing the translation of over three decades of satellite imagery into evidence of how Australia’s land, vegetation and waterbodies have changed over time. 

* **Breaking change: Shift in grid origin point** &mdash; The south-west origin point of the DEA Summary Product Grid has been shifted 18 tiles west and 15 tiles south. Therefore, all tile grid references have been changed. For instance, a tile reference of `x10y10` has changed to `x28y25`. The tile grid references of all derivative products generated from 2024 onwards will also be changed; however, Analysis Ready Data products will not be affected.
* **Breaking change: Data structure changes** &mdash; Land Cover version 1.0 contained several TIF files including `waterstt-wat-cat-l4a.tif`, `watersea-veg-cat-l4a-au.tif`, `waterper-wat-cat-l4d-au.tif`, `lifeform-veg-cat-l4a.tif`, `inttidal-wat-cat-l4a.tif`, `canopyco-veg-cat-l4d.tif`, and `baregrad-phy-cat-l4d-au.tif`. These will not be provided in Land Cover 2.0 because the classifications are instead contained within the `level4.tif` file, allowing users to filter the results as required. An RGB TIF colour representation of the Land Cover classifications is also no longer available. Instead, a style file will be provided that can be uploaded to your GIS software which will apply the same colour representations of the classifications in the Level 3 and Level 4 TIF files.
* **Enhanced cloud masking to reduce noise** &mdash; An enhancement to cloud masking for input derivative products have reduced cloud and shadow noise. This enhancement (known as 'cloud buffering') involved cleaning cloud masks using a 3-pixel morphological opening on clouds (GeoMAD only) and a 6-pixel dilation on cloud and shadows. Note that some areas of very high surface reflectance (e.g. sand dunes and ocean areas) may exhibit worsened noise or data gaps, but these are infrequent occurrences with low impact.
* **Landsat 9 included** &mdash; Landsat 9 is now included from 2022 onwards which achieves better performance than the stand-alone Landsat 8 product due to using a larger number of available observations
* **Collection Upgrade** &mdash; Land Cover version 2.0.0. is based on the latest Landsat Collection 3 Analysis Ready Data. The pixel resolution for Land Cover has changed from 25m to 30m resolution.
* **Machine Learning Upgrade** &mdash; The settings for Machine Learning (ML) methods and algorithms have been changed to improve performance. This is for woody cover, cultivated vegetation, and artificial surfaces classification. The Urban model uses a different ML approach, shifting from a pixel-based to a raster-based method, and a new model was trained using Collection 3 data. The Cultivated model maintains the same approach, but the input features were re-engineered using Collection 3 data, and the model was re-trained. The Woody cover model also follows the same approach, with the model being re-trained using Collection 3 data.
* **Product ID Update** &mdash; The Land Cover product ID has been updated to reflect the new ARD collection being used. It was changed from `ga_ls_landcover_class_cyear_2` to `ga_ls_landcover_class_cyear_3`.
* **'No data' value changed** &mdash; The 'No data' value has been changed from '0' to '255' to be consistent with other DEA derivative products.

