## Background

Intertidal zones are coastal environments exposed to both air and water, at low and high tide consecutively, and include sandy beaches, tidal flats, rocky shores and reefs.
They also characterise critical coastal habitats and ecosystems, and support a wide range of species and ecosystem-services.
Increasingly though, these dynamic environments are faced with threats from land reclaimation, coastal erosion and rising sea levels, amongst others.

The ever-changing nature of the tides makes it hard to systematically capture consistent imagery of the intertidal zone, particularly across large regions and especially in remote areas of the country.
[Geomedian statistical techniques](https://knowledge.dea.ga.gov.au/data/product/dea-geometric-median-and-median-absolute-deviation-landsat/) provide a robust method to combine tide-attributed time-series satellite imagery and produce representative and artefact free imagery 'composites' of Australia's coastal high and low tide environments.

## What this product offers

This product provides a suite of cloud-free composite Sentinel-2 satellite data that enables imaging of Australian coastal intertidal zones at both high and low tide. 
Using a geometric median (geomedian), the highest and lowest 20% of observed tidal ranges in Digital Earth Australia (DEA)’s Sentinel-2 imagery archive are combined to deliver annual snapshots of Australian coastal high and low tide environments.

Sentinel-2 satellite images are tidally attributed though pairing with pixel-based local tidal modelling, generated from a selected ensemble of the best performing global tide models under local conditions.
Tidal attribution allows the imagery archive to be sorted by tide height rather than date, so the intertidal zone can be visualised during any stage of the tide regime.  

The composite high and low tide imagery is delivered at a 10 m spatial resolution and is updated annually using 3 year rolling epochs of input data.

% ## Data description

## Applications

* Mapping cover types within the intertidal zone
* Visualising the full observed extent of the tidal range around the Australian continental coastline
* Monitoring for change in Australian coastal environments

## Technical information

Inter-tidal zones are difficult regions to characterise due to the dynamic nature of the tide. They are highly changeable environments, subject to forcings from the land, sea and atmosphere and yet they form critical habitats for a wide range of organisms from birds to fish, mangroves and seagrass. By harnessing the archive of satellite imagery over Australia's coastal zones and pairing images with pixel based tide modelling, the archive can be sorted by tide height rather than date, enabling the intertidal zone to be viewed at any stage of the tide regime.

DEA Tidal Composites include 25 layers of data, separated into lowtide, hightide and quality assurance categories. Lowtide and hightide layers represent composites of the synthetic geomedian surface reflectance from Sentinel-2a, b and c NBART analysis-ready data streams to ensure a valid surface reflectance spectra suitable for uses such as habitat mapping (Li et al., 2012; Roberts et al., 2017). Combining respective lowtide and hightide data layers delivers cloud free and noise reduced visualisation of the shallow water and intertidal coastal regions of Australia (Sagar et al., 2018). Quality assurance layers are provided to support interpretation of the lowtide and hightide datasets and include the tide-height thresholds above/below which associated images were included in the compositing process and the count of clear input images that contributed to each pixel in the composites.

Spatially and temporally aligned to the [DEA Intertidal product suite](https://knowledge.dea.ga.gov.au/data/product/dea-intertidal/), DEA Tidal Composites are an annually updated data suite, generated from rolling 3-year epochs, with a minimum of 10 m spatial resolution.

An [ensemble tidal modelling](ensemble-tidal-modelling) approach was implemented to account for the varying performance and biases of existing global ocean tide models across the complex tidal regimes and coastal regions of Australia. The ensemble process utilises ancillary data to select and weight tidal models at any given coastal location, based on how well each model correlates with local satellite-observed patterns of tidal inundation, and water levels measured by satellite altimetry. A single ensemble tidal output was generated by combining the top 3 locally optimal models, and then used for all downstream product workflows.

### Features

The DEA Tidal Composites product is a 25-band mosaic, consistent with Sentinel-2, produced to allow visualisation of the shallow water and intertidal coastal regions as observed at high or low tide. It is continental (coastal) in coverage and includes geomedian surface reflectance, along with pixel level metadata for each of the high and low tide mosaics.

The [**file naming convention**](https://knowledge.dea.ga.gov.au/guides/reference/collection_3_naming/#different-types-of-products) is as follows:

```
[ORGANISATION]_[PLATFORM]_[PRODUCT]_[REPORTING PERIOD]_[COLLECTION]_[TILE REFERENCE]--[DATA PERIOD]_[PRODUCT STATUS]_[BAND NAME].[FILE EXTENSION]
```

e.g. `ga_s2_tidal_composites_cyear_3_x080y125_2022--P1Y_final_low-red-edge-3.tif`

## Lineage

The product has been developed to provide a geomedian composite dataset of coastal regions of Australia for the highest and lowest 20% of the observed tidal range in the Sentinel-2 catalogue, enabling both visualisation and spectral analysis. Coastal Sentinel-2 observations are composited relative to tidal modelling of the Australian coastline using an ensemble of global tide models, leveraging python packages [eo-tides](https://github.com/GeoscienceAustralia/eo-tides) and [pyTMD](https://github.com/tsutterley/pyTMD).

## Processing steps

### 1. Create a continental scale tidal modelling framework

Create a continental scale tidal modelling framework utilising continental scale tidal prediction software developed by Oregon State University (OTPS, Egbert and Erofeeva, 2002, 2010). OTPS tide heights were attributed to Landsat observations in the DEA at corresponding times and dates, per location

The modelling process utilises continental scale tidal prediction software developed by Oregon State University (OTPS, Egbert and Erofeeva, 2002, 2010). OTPS tide heights were attributed to Landsat observations in the DEA at corresponding times and dates, per location.

To account for geographic and seasonal variations in tidal regimes and ranges, twelve tidal height rasters of the study region at 1km resolution were created utilising the OTPS model, at a randomly selected monthly epoch across a full year. Utilising these raster layers, the tidal modelling spatial framework was constructed with the following steps:
* Perform a multi-resolution segmentation using eCognition software, utilising all twelve tidal height inputs, to create a spatial representation of the multi-epoch tidal variation across the continent.
* Extract the centroids of the object segments created in eCognition and generate a Voronoi Polygon tessellation of the region.
* Perform a visual assessment and manual adjustment of the Voronoi polygon boundaries and nodes to ensure alignment with natural boundaries and coastal/island features.

Through this process, the coastal zone is divided into Voronoi polygons that capture the tidal complexity of the Australian coast, with areas of complex tidal behaviour represented using smaller polygons. The nodes of the polygons can then be used for the tidal attribution process as described in Sagar et al., (2017). 

### 2. Generate HOT and LOT composite imagery

Generate HOT and LOT composite imagery: Landsat TM and OLI NBAR extracted for each tidal model polygon for 2010-17 range; pixel filtered; tagged and sorted by tidal height (OTPS); pixel based geomedian composites created from HT and LT composite subsets.

The high and low tide composite generation comprises the following steps:
* Landsat TM and OLI NBAR time-series observations archived in the DEA are extracted for each tidal model polygon for the 2010-17 time range..
* Data is then filtered on a pixel basis to remove poor quality data including cloud, cloud shadow and band saturation.
* Observations are tagged with a tidal height relative to Mean Sea Level (MSL) utilising the OTPS model, time of acquisition and location of the polygon model node.
* Observations are sorted by tidal height to allow identify subsets acquired at high and low tide:
  * the lower 20th percentile of the observed tidal range, which are used to calculate the low tide composite,  and,
  * the upper 20th percentile of the observed tidal range which are used to calculate the high tide composite.
* Pixel based geomedian composites are then created from the high and low tide composite subsets.
* The composite is visually inspected to assess the quality (ie. remnant cloud noise, lack of data). If required, steps 1-5 are then repeated with an additional 5 years of archival data added to the process. Ultimately, highest observed tide (HOT) composites ranged from either 1995-17 or 2000-17 per polygon. Lowest observed tide (LOT) composites ranged from either 2000-17, 2005-17 or 2010-17 per polygon. 

* Due the sun-synchronous nature of the various Landsat sensor observations; it is unlikely that the full physical extents of the tidal range in any cell will be observed. Hence, terminology has been adopted for the product to reflect the highest modelled tide observed in a given cell (HOT) and the lowest modelled tide observed (LOT). These measures are relative to Mean Sea Level, and have no consistent relationship to Lowest (LAT) and Highest Astronomical Tide (HAT).

% ## Software

## References

Egbert, G. D., & Erofeeva, S. Y. (2002). Efficient Inverse Modeling of Barotropic Ocean Tides. *Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology*, *19*(2), 183–204. [https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0426(2002)019<0183:EIMOBO>2.0.CO;2](https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0426(2002)019%3c0183:EIMOBO%3e2.0.CO;2)

Egbert, G.D., Erofeeva, S.Y., 2010. The OSU TOPEX/Poseiden Global Inverse Solution TPXO [WWW Document]. TPXO8-Atlas Version 10. URL [http://volkov.oce.orst.edu/tides/global.html](http://volkov.oce.orst.edu/tides/global.html) (accessed 2.15.16).

Li, F., Jupp, D. L. B., Thankappan, M., Lymburner, L., Mueller, N., Lewis, A., & Held, A. (2012). A physics-based atmospheric and BRDF correction for Landsat data over mountainous terrain. *Remote Sensing of Environment*, *124*, 756–770. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2012.06.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2012.06.018)

Roberts, D., Mueller, N., & Mcintyre, A. (2017). High-Dimensional Pixel Composites From Earth Observation Time Series. *IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing*, *55*(11), 6254–6264. [https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2017.2723896](https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2017.2723896)

Rubel, F., & Kottek, M. (2010). Observed and projected climate shifts 1901-2100 depicted by world maps of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification. *Meteorologische Zeitschrift*, *19*, 135–141. [https://doi.org/10.1127/0941-2948/2010/0430](https://doi.org/10.1127/0941-2948/2010/0430)

Sagar, S., Phillips, C., Bala, B., Roberts, D., & Lymburner, L. (2018). Generating Continental Scale Pixel-Based Surface Reflectance Composites in Coastal Regions with the Use of a Multi-Resolution Tidal Model. *Remote Sensing*, *10*, 480. [https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10030480](https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10030480)

Sagar, S., Roberts, D., Bala, B., & Lymburner, L. (2017). Extracting the intertidal extent and topography of the Australian coastline from a 28year time series of Landsat observations. *Remote Sensing of Environment*, *195*, 153–169. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.04.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.04.009)

