## Accuracy

### Disclosure

This product can be rendered in both true colour and false colour. Validation and interpretation of surface features has not been attempted here. Interpretation of surface features is at the users own discretion.

### Tide modelling

The Ensemble Tidal Modelling approach was implemented to account for the varying [performance and biases](https://knowledge.dea.ga.gov.au/data/product/dea-intertidal/?tab=description#ensemble-tidal-modelling) of existing global ocean tide models across the complex tidal regimes and coastal regions of Australia. The ensemble process utilises ancillary data such as local tide guages and satellite altimetry to select and weight tidal models at any given coastal location, based on how well each model correlates with local satellite-observed patterns of tidal inundation, and water levels measured by satellite altimetry. A single ensemble tidal output was generated by combining the top 3 locally optimal models, representing the most accurate modelled tide heights based on the selection of input models against the validation data.

Ensemble tide modelling, using the same input data and models, for the same temporal epochs was used in the generation of the [DEA Intertidal](https://knowledge.dea.ga.gov.au/data/product/dea-intertidal/) product suite and can consequently be considered for DEA Tidal Composites. The [DEA Intertidal Elevation Uncertainty](https://knowledge.dea.ga.gov.au/data/product/dea-intertidal/?tab=description#core-product-layers) dataset is useful to understand both a) highly dynamic coastal environments where tide modelling is less certain and b) geographic influences on tide modelling uncertainty. The latter exist in places where underlying inputs, such as local bathymetry, to tide modelling results in lower certainty in the global tide model. An outcome of this type of uncertainty is that the absolute modelled tide height values may be incorrect. For DEA Tidal Composites, this may result in a slight offset in absolute tide heights at some locations but is unlikely to alter the images that are selected in the upper and lower 15th percentile ranges of tide heights as the overall trends in tidal changes are still maintained by the tide modelling.

### Geomedian calculation

Accuracies and limitations related to geomedian compositing of observations are discussed in Roberts et al (2017).

## Caveats and limitations

* Natural biases exist in the imaging of coastal tide ranges by orbiting spectral satellites such as Sentinel-2. Attempts to quantify these offsets are reported in the supporting [DEA Intertidal Tide Attribute](https://knowledge.dea.ga.gov.au/data/product/dea-intertidal/?tab=description#tidal-attribute-layers) layers. These biases mean that while DEA Tidal Composites represent the upper and lower 15 percent of all satellite observations of the local tide range, they do not represent the upper and lower 15 percent of the full astronomical tide range. This means DEA Tidal Composites may not capture the extreme ends of the local tide range at some locations.
* These biases may extend to seasonal and diurnal effects in the imagery, where the low and high tide imagery that the composites are derived from may not be evenly distributed across seasons in different geographic regions. We recommend users to refer to the accompanying graphs of satellite obervations and their tidal distribution provided through the DEA Maps platform to assess potential impacts.
* DEA Tidal Composites is delivered as an annually updated dataset, generated from rolling 3-year epochs of input data. In some locations, particularly those affected by regular cloud cover, the number of clear images from the upper and lower parts of the observed tide range may be few, resulting in artefacts in the imagery. 
* To maximise data density for clear geomedian outputs, we use a minimum number of 20 input observations. For pixels where less than 20 observations were available during the epoch, the resulting spectral geoemedian values should be considered unreliable. The [qa_count_clear](./?tab=specifications#bands) layer identifies these pixel locations.
* Tidal modelling is used to subset and select imagery to represent the tidal stages of oceanic and coastal intertidal regions.  The geomedian values for terrestrial pixels produced as part of this subsetting process will vary based on these tidal subsets, but are not relective of any specific terrestrial environment constraints.
*   Data input into the compositing process has been filtered by sun angle and satellite acquistion geometry, to remove observations with a high likelihood of sun glint. However some residual glint may still occur, particular in the North-Eastern regions of the country, reducing the quality of the geomedian imagery.
*   Offshore shallow water regions such as the Great Barrier Reef can be impacted by a the lower quality and number of ARD observations in the Sentinel-2 archive. These regions have been excluded from the current release of the DEA Tidal Composites product, resulting in notable gaps particularly across south-eastern extents of the reef. This issue is under investigation for future iterations of the product.

## Quality assurance

### Data pre-processing

Only quality, clear data was included as input data in DEA Tidal Composites. Data pre-processing included cleansing the imagery of cloudy, cloud-shadow and sunglint.

### Codebase testing

Code used to generate DEA Tidal Composites is run against automated [integration tests](https://github.com/GeoscienceAustralia/dea-intertidal/tree/develop/tests) to ensure that product quality is maintained as updates and improvements are made. These tests verify that the entire product generation workflow is performing as expected, and track changes in product accuracy over time.