## Background

Intertidal zones are those which are exposed to the air at low tide and underwater at high tide. These include sandy beaches, tidal flats, rocky shores and reefs.

Intertidal zones form critical habitats for a wide range of organisms, but are faced with increasing threats, including coastal erosion and a rise in sea levels.

The ever-changing nature of the tides makes it hard to systematically capture consistent imagery of the intertidal zone, particularly across large regions. Pressure is mounting on this zone from sea-level rise and anthropogenic sources such as land reclamation and aquaculture.

## What this product offers

This product is a suite of cloud-free composite imagery of the intertidal zones at high and low tide around the Australian coast. It calculates the geometric median (geomedian) of the highest and lowest 20% of the observed tidal range in Digital Earth Australia (DEA)’s archive of Landsat satellite images.

To generate these composites, the archive of Landsat images has been paired with regional tidal modelling, generated by Oregon State Tidal Prediction software. This allows the archive to be sorted by tide height rather than date, so the intertidal zone can be visualised at any stage of the tide regime.  

The data has been captured on a 25m spatial scale.

% ## Data description

## Applications

* Mapping cover types within the intertidal zone
* Visualising the full observed extent of the tidal range around the Australian continental coastline

## Technical information

Inter-tidal zones are difficult regions to characterise due to the dynamic nature of the tide. They are highly changeable environments, subject to forcings from the land, sea and atmosphere and yet they form critical habitats for a wide range of organisms from birds to fish and sea grass. By harnessing the long archive of satellite imagery over Australia's coastal zones in the DEA and pairing the images with regional tidal modelling, the archive can be sorted by tide height rather than date, enabling the inter-tidal zone to be viewed at any stage of the tide regime.

The High Low Tide Composites (HLTC\_25) product is composed of two mosaics, distinguished by tide height, representing a composite image of the synthetic geomedian surface reflectance from Landsats 5 TM, Landsat 7 ETM+ and Landsat 8 OLI NBAR data (Li et al., 2012; Roberts et al., 2017). These products have been produced using Digital Earth Australia (DEA). The two mosaics allow cloud free and noise reduced visualisation of the shallow water and inter-tidal coastal regions of Australia, as observed at high and low tide respectively (Sagar et al., 2018).

The composites are generated utilising the geomedian approach of Roberts et al (2017) to ensure a valid surface reflectance spectra suitable for uses such as habitat mapping. The time range used for composite generation in each polygon of the mosaic is tailored to ensure dynamic coastal features are captured whilst still allowing a clean and cloud free composite to be generated. The concepts of the Observed Tidal Range (OTR), and Highest and Lowest Observed Tide (HOT, LOT) are discussed and described fully in Sagar et al. (2017) and the product description for the ITEM v 1.0 product (Geoscience Australia, 2016).

Oregon State Tidal Prediction (OTPS) software (Egbert and Erofeeva, 2002, 2010) was used to generate tide heights, relative to mean sea level, for the Australian continental coastline, split into 306 distinct tidal regions. These time and date stamped tidal values were then attributed to all coastal tile observations for their time of acquisition, creating a range of observed tide heights for the Australian coastline. The two mosaics in HLTC\_25 are composited from the highest and lowest 20 % of observed tide in the ensemble and are termed HOT and LOT respectively. A geomedian composite for each Landsat band is calculated from the tiles in each ensemble subset to produce the respective HOT and LOT composites (Sagar et al., 2018). Note that Landsat 7 ETM+ observations are excluded after May 2003 due to a large number of data artefacts.

The time range used for composite generation in each of the 306 polygons of the mosaics is tailored to ensure dynamic coastal features are captured whilst still allowing a clean and cloud free composite to be generated. The maximum epoch for which the products are calculated is between 1995-2017, although this varies due to data resolution and observation quality. The product also includes a count of clear observations per pixel for both mosaics.

Observations are filtered to remove poor quality observations including cloud, cloud shadow and band saturation (of any band).

#### Features

The High and Low Tide Composites product is a 6-band mosaic, consistent with Landsat, produced to allow visualisation of the shallow water and inter-tidal coastal regions as observed at high or low tide. It is continental (coastal) in coverage and includes geomedian surface reflectance, along with pixel and polygon level metadata for each of the 306 polygons contained in each of the HOT and LOT mosaics.

The supporting polygon level metadata includes the following **attributes**:

**ID** - polygon ID number

**lon** \- polygon centroid longitude

**lat** - polygon centroid latitude

**date\_range** - range of input dates

**modelLow** - lowest modelled tide height between the input dates

**modelHigh** - highest modelled tide height between the input dates

**MaximumObs** - maximum count of clear observations for any pixel in the polygon

**LIT** - lowest input tide height to the composite image

**HIT** - highest input tide height to the composite image

**stages** - the count of each observed tide stage in the composite image. Where

* **e** = ebbing tide
* **f** = flowing tide
* **ph** = peak high tide
* **pl** \= peak low tide.

The tide stages were calculated by comparison to the modeled tide data for 15 minutes either side of the observation to determine the ebb, flow or peak movement of the tide.

The ***composites* file naming convention** is as follows:

COMPOSITE\_\[HIGH or LOW\]\_\[polygon ID\]\_\[centroid longitude\]\_\[centroid latitude\]\_\[input date range\]\_PER\_20.\[nc or tif\]

e.g. COMPOSITE\_HIGH\_297\_120.3\_-19.36\_20000101\_20170101\_PER\_20.nc

The ***maximum pixel count* naming convention** is as follows:

COUNT\_\[HIGH or LOW\]\_\[polygon ID\]\_\[centroid longitude\]\_\[centroid latitude\]\_\[input date range\]\_PER\_20.\[nc or tif\]

e.g. COUNT\_HIGH\_297\_120.3\_-19.36\_20000101\_20170101\_PER\_20.nc

## Lineage

The product has been developed to provide a geomedian composite visualisation of coastal regions of Australia for the highest and lowest 20% of the observed tidal range in the Landsat catalogue.  Coastal Landsat observations are composited relative to tidal modelling of the Australian coastline (split into 306 polygons, characterised by similar tidal characteristics) using Oregon State Tidal Prediction Software (OTPS, Egbert and Erofeeva, 2002, 2010)).

## Processing steps

* Create a continental scale tidal modelling framework

* Generate HOT and LOT composite imagery

% ## Software

## References

Egbert, G. D., & Erofeeva, S. Y. (2002). Efficient Inverse Modeling of Barotropic Ocean Tides. *Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology*, *19*(2), 183–204. [https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0426(2002)019<0183:EIMOBO>2.0.CO;2](https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0426(2002)019%3c0183:EIMOBO%3e2.0.CO;2)

Li, F., Jupp, D. L. B., Thankappan, M., Lymburner, L., Mueller, N., Lewis, A., & Held, A. (2012). A physics-based atmospheric and BRDF correction for Landsat data over mountainous terrain. *Remote Sensing of Environment*, *124*, 756–770. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2012.06.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2012.06.018)

Roberts, D., Mueller, N., & Mcintyre, A. (2017). High-Dimensional Pixel Composites From Earth Observation Time Series. *IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing*, *55*(11), 6254–6264. [https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2017.2723896](https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2017.2723896)

Rubel, F., & Kottek, M. (2010). Observed and projected climate shifts 1901-2100 depicted by world maps of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification. *Meteorologische Zeitschrift*, *19*, 135–141. [https://doi.org/10.1127/0941-2948/2010/0430](https://doi.org/10.1127/0941-2948/2010/0430)

Sagar, S., Phillips, C., Bala, B., Roberts, D., & Lymburner, L. (2018). Generating Continental Scale Pixel-Based Surface Reflectance Composites in Coastal Regions with the Use of a Multi-Resolution Tidal Model. *Remote Sensing*, *10*, 480. [https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10030480](https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10030480)

Sagar, S., Roberts, D., Bala, B., & Lymburner, L. (2017). Extracting the intertidal extent and topography of the Australian coastline from a 28year time series of Landsat observations. *Remote Sensing of Environment*, *195*, 153–169. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.04.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.04.009)

